---
layout: post
title: Granola Recipe
tags: recipe
---

{% include unit-switcher.html %}

Preheat the oven to {% unit "325°F" "160°C" %}.

Prepare the dry ingredients. In a large bowl, mix {% unit "½ to ¾ cup" "75-150g" %} each of any seeds and nuts you'd like. I usually use:

- {% unit "½ cup" "80g" %} pumpkin seeds (salted, roasted)
- {% unit "½ cup" "80g" %} sunflower seeds
- {% unit "½ cup" "80g" %} sliced almonds
- {% unit "¾ cup" "140g" %} whole almonds (salted, roasted)

Mix briefly with your hands, then add

- {% unit "2 lb." "1kg" %} rolled oats

and again mix briefly with your hands.

Then create the syrupy sauce business. In a sauce pan, combine

- {% unit "½ cup" "140g" %} brown sugar
- {% unit "¾ cup" "170g" %} vegetable oil
- {% unit "½ cup" "200g" %} honey

{% unit "in that order (to minimize sticking to your measuring device)," "" %} and cook over medium heat until the bubbles mostly subside.

Create a small well in the oat-nut mixture and pour the sauce into it. (The well prevents the sugar magma from contacting the bowl immediately, in case your bowl is not very heat-safe.) Mix with a large spoon until there are no more dry spots. Pro tip: start soaking the sauce pan and spoon now to clean them faster.

Coat each of {% unit "two 18\" by 13\"" "two 40 cm by 30 cm" %} rimmed baking sheets with

- 1 tbsp vegetable oil

Spread the granola mixture evenly across them about {% unit "½\"" "1.5 cm" %} deep and, for extra credit, leave a {% unit "½\"" "1 cm" %} buffer around the edge to prevent overcooking. (If you need to do batches: the raw granola is about {% unit "3½ lb." "1900g" %} all together.)

Bake for 25-35 minutes, rotating and switching racks halfway through for even cooking.

Remove from oven and allow to cool for about 20 minutes, at which point the granola should be partly pliable, partly crunchy -- perfect for snapping into bite-size chunks. Use a metal spatula to scrape it off the baking sheets. (If you prefer atomized granola, allow to cool longer, whereupon it will shatter into a million pieces when you try to get it off the sheets.)

Store at room temperature and consume with great enthusiasm.

{% include next-previous.html %}
