---
layout: post
title: Yogurt Recipe
tags: recipe
---

{% include unit-switcher.html %}

Makes as much yogurt as milk you put in. Scales up or down indefinitely.

In addition to the ingredients, you'll need one or more containers equalling the volume of milk you use, an ice bath, and a sous vide machine (or a few towels).

If you use a sous vide machine, this recipe will require about 4 hours of fermentation. Make sure the containers are tall enough or seal tightly enough that they will not leak into the bath.

If you do not use a sous vide machine, the recipe will probably require more than 4 hours of fermentation, and the final product will likely be thinner. You may also want to start the fermentation {% unit "5°F" "3°C" %} hotter, to keep the yogurt cultures in their preferred temperature range for longer (but not too hot!).

You can reculture some store-bought yogurts, as long as they specify they have live cultures, which you can find in both cheap and expensive yogurts.

---

Heat

- {% unit "½ gallon"  "2 liters" %} whole milk

in a pot over medium heat until it reaches {% unit "200°F" "95°C" %}, stirring frequently to minimize scalding, and skimming off the skin as necessary.

Prepare an ice bath for the milk. Chill, stirring frequently to ensure even cooling, until it reaches {% unit "110°F" "45°C" %}.

Add

- {% unit "½ cup" "125ml" %} yogurt

to a small bowl. Spoon approximately {% unit "¼ cup" "50ml" %} of milk into the yogurt, stirring to combine, then repeat a couple more times until the yogurt is warmed and diluted.

Pour the yogurt mixture back into the milk pot, and stir thoroughly.

If you're using a sous vide machine, set it to {% unit "110°F" "45°C" %}. Divide the milk mixture into your containers, and put them in the sous vide bath. Sous vide for 4 hours.

If you are not using a sous vide machine, leave the milk mixture in the pot and wrap it completely with towels. Set it in a warm place in the kitchen for at least 4 hours.

The yogurt is done when it reaches your desired consistency and tartness. Longer fermentations will thicken the yogurt (to a limit) and make it more tart. Remember that cold yogurt is thicker! If you want to make Greek yogurt, strain through cheesecloth or a fine mesh strainer until your desired consistency is reached.

{% include common-footer.html %}
